machine-level-representation-of-programs./c-assembly-and-machine-code..md, before:

# `C`, Assembly Language, and Machine Code.

## Definitions.

We talked about architectures in the previous page but what is an architecture. 
it would help to define some things. We define the _architecture_ of a processor 
to be parts of the processor design that one needs to understand and write 
assembly and machine code. The _microarchitecture_ is the implementation of 
the architecture of the processor; examples of microarchitecture include cache sizes 
and core frequencies. We also call the high level design of these architectures
_instruction set architectures_, and are used by Intel on `intel` processors. 
Mobile phones usually use `ARM` architectures. It is useful to note that while 
different processors can use the same instruction set architecture, they do not 
implement the same microarchitectures. We will focus just on the architecture in 
this course.

We have mentioned machine code and assembly previously, but it would serve as a 
refresher to define them here as well. _Machine code_ is the byte level program 
that a typical architecture executes. This code is highly machine specific and 
will usually only run on one type of architecture; causing portability issues.
_Assembly code_ is the text representation of machine code. Assembly being a 
`1-1` translation of machine code to something more human readable inherits the 
machine specific nature, and portability issues of machine code; albeit, to a 
lesser extent.

## Assembly/Machine Code View of a Processor.

![The Layout of a typical multicore processor.](../Figures/Chapter3/cpu.png)

Since we do not have to worry about the processor at the mircoarchitecture level, 
we can view the processor the way typical machine or assembly code would.

The processor in essence consists of two components. The first is the _central 
processor unit_ \(CPU\), and is the main body from which instructions will be 
executed. It consists of a _program counter_ \(PC\) which stores the address of 
the next instruction, and is viewed by assembly as the `rip` \(`x86_64`\) or 
`eip` \(`x86_32`\), and is referred to as the _instruction pointer_. The CPU 
also contains a _register file_ which contains heavily used program data, and 
contains _condition codes_, which store the status information about arithmetic 
and logical operations, and is also used for conditional branching \(`if`, `else`
statements\). The CPU also contains the _arithmetic logic unit_ \(ALU\) which is 
in charge of handling arithmetic and logical operations.



The other component of a processor is the _memory_. Here, bytes are stored in 
_addresses_ as an addressable array. This array stores code and user data, a 
_heap_ for allocating memory, and a _stack_ to support procedures and variables.
Typically, the CPU sends address and data to memory, while it fetches data and 
instructions from memory.

## Turning `C` into Object Code and Compiling into Assembly.

Typically, a programmer wants to turn code written in a high level language, such 
as `C` into low level machine instructions. For programming languages like 
`C/C++`, `Java`. This is done through the use of a _compiler_. A programmer can 
put code into _source_ files like `p1.c` and `p2.c` and compile them with the 
`gcc` compiler though the command:

```bash
~/ccom4086/ > gcc -o p p1.c p2.c
```

Here, the `-o` flag just specifies the output file, the default output is `a.out`. 
The compiler then takes `p1.c` and `p2.c` as input files and outputs a _binary_ 
file `p` which can be executed by the machine. How the compiler achieves this is 
by:

1. Converting the source files into assembly.
2. Creating _object_ files `p1.o` and `p2.o`.
3. Linking the object files through the linker into the binary file `p`.

If we wanted to implement basic optimization, and even compile it for debugging, 
we can run `gcc` with the following flags `-Og` \(optimization\) and `-g` 
\(debugging\):

```bash
~/ccom4086/ > gcc -Og -g -o p p1.c p2.c
```

![](../Figures/Chapter3/assemblyAndLinkage.png)

```c
// sum.c
long plus(long x, long y){
    return x+y;
}

void sumstore(long x, long y, long *dest){

    long t = plus(x,y);
    *dest = t;

    return;
}
```

We can also view the assembly of some code by compiling with the `gcc` flag `-S`, 
which outputs a `.S` file.

```c
// Portion of sum.s compiled with gcc -Og -S sum.c
sumstore:
.LFB0:
    .cfi_startproc
    pushq    %rbx
    .cfi_def_cfa_offset 16
    .cfi_offset 3, -16
    movq    %rdx, %rbx
    call    plus@PLT
    movq    %rax, (%rbx)
    popq    %rbx
    .cfi_def_cfa_offset 8
    ret
    .cfi_endproc
.LFE0:
    .size    sumstore, .-sumstore
    .ident    "GCC: (GNU) 11.1.0"
    .section    .note.GNU-stack,"",@progbits
```

Due to different versions of the `gcc` compiler running on different machines, 
the assembly output of the source code varies. So it is possible to have multiple
assembly translations of the same source code. Different compiler settings will 
also affect the assembly output of a program. For example, compare the following 
assembly compiled without the `-Og` flag to the one above that was.

```c
// Portion of sum.s compiled with gcc -S sum.c
sumstore:
.LFB0:
    .cfi_startproc
    pushq    %rbp
    .cfi_def_cfa_offset 16
    .cfi_offset 6, -16
    movq    %rsp, %rbp
    .cfi_def_cfa_register 6
    subq    $48, %rsp
    movq    %rdi, -24(%rbp)
    movq    %rsi, -32(%rbp)
    movq    %rdx, -40(%rbp)
    movq    -32(%rbp), %rdx
    movq    -24(%rbp), %rax
    movq    %rdx, %rsi
    movq    %rax, %rdi
    call    plus@PLT
    movq    %rax, -8(%rbp)
    movq    -40(%rbp), %rax
    movq    -8(%rbp), %rdx
    movq    %rdx, (%rax)
    nop
    leave
    .cfi_def_cfa 7, 8
    ret
    .cfi_endproc
```

Actually, additional code for exception handling is injected if not using the flag 
`-fno-asynchronous-unwind-tables`. We usually want to optimize the code, so `-Og` 
is useful, however the more we optimize the code, the further away the assembly 
language is from the original source code. Hence it is good practice to apply a 
level of optimization that maintains some semblance of the original `C` code, in 
order to maintain readability.

## Assembly Characteristics.

### Data Types.

We list how assembly language treats data types.

* `int`:
  * Are of `1`, `2`, `4`, or `8` bytes.
  * Data values.
  * Addresses \(untyped pointers\).
* Floating point:
  * of `4`, `8`, or `10` bytes.
* Code:
  * Byte sequences encoding a series of instructions.
* No Aggregate types such as arrays or structures.
  * Everything is contiguously allocated in memory.

The `C` language, albeit being high level, was also designed with the purpose of 
being as low level as possible, and as close to assembly as possible. Because of 
this, `C` has the added benefit of having some of its data types coincide with 
those used by assembly. `C++`, being built on top of `C` also benefits from this, 
however it is noticeably higher level than `C`.

One can perform arithmetic on registers or memory data in assembly language. 
Typically, data is transferred between memory and a register. Data is loaded 
from memory into a register, and register data can be stored into memory. Assembly 
also handles _transfer control_ where it executes unconditional jumps to and from
procedures, as well as perform conditional branching.

When compiled, the source is translated into assembly, and then loaded into an 
_assembler_, which translates the `.s` into a `.o` object files, takes a binary 
encoding of each instruction, and makes an nearly complete image of executable 
code which is missing the linkage of codes in different files. The _linker_ 
resolves the issue of missing code by resolving references between files and 
combining the code with _static_ runtime libraries. Some of the code can be 
_dynamically_ linked, which means that linking occurs during program execution. 
The following is an example of what is typically stored in a `.o` file. When one 
uses procedures like `printf()` in `C` code, these are located in external 
libraries \(in this case, `stdio.h`\) and are linked to the program at 
compilations. If they are not linked, the program would no work.

```bash
~/ccom4086/ > gcc -Og -c sum.c
~/ccom4086/ > objdump -d sum.o
sum.o:     file format elf64-x86-64


Disassembly of section .text:

0000000000000000 <sumstore>:
   0:    53                       push   %rbx
   1:    48 89 d3                 mov    %rdx,%rbx
   4:    e8 00 00 00 00           call   9 <sumstore+0x9>
   9:    48 89 03                 mov    %rax,(%rbx)
   c:    5b                       pop    %rbx
   d:    c3                       ret
```

Using the command `objdump` is useful for examining object code. With it one can 
analyze but patterns of series of instructions, and produces an approximate 
rendition of assembly code. It can also be run on `a.out` files \(that is 
complete binaries\) as well as `.o` object files. The following is a portion of 
an object dump performed on the `cat` command of `unix` \(`/usr/bin/cat`\):

```bash
~/ccom4086/ > objdump -d /usr/bin/cat | head

/usr/bin/cat:     file format elf64-x86-64


Disassembly of section .init:

0000000000002000 <.init>:
    2000:    f3 0f 1e fa              endbr64
    2004:    48 83 ec 08              sub    $0x8,%rsp
    2008:    48 8b 05 19 8f 00 00     mov    0x8f19(%rip),%rax
```

Commit message:

Finished notes on assembly. Working on fixing math typesetting.

machine-level-representation-of-programs./c-assembly-and-machine-code..md, after:

# `C`, Assembly Language, and Machine Code.

## Definitions.

We talked about architectures in the previous page but what is an architecture. 
it would help to define some things. We define the _architecture_ of a processor 
to be parts of the processor design that one needs to understand and write 
assembly and machine code. The _microarchitecture_ is the implementation of 
the architecture of the processor; examples of microarchitecture include cache sizes 
and core frequencies. We also call the high level design of these architectures
_instruction set architectures_, and are used by Intel on `intel` processors. 
Mobile phones usually use `ARM` architectures. It is useful to note that while 
different processors can use the same instruction set architecture, they do not 
implement the same microarchitectures. We will focus just on the architecture in 
this course.

We have mentioned machine code and assembly previously, but it would serve as a 
refresher to define them here as well. _Machine code_ is the byte level program 
that a typical architecture executes. This code is highly machine specific and 
will usually only run on one type of architecture; causing portability issues.
_Assembly code_ is the text representation of machine code. Assembly being a 
`1-1` translation of machine code to something more human readable inherits the 
machine specific nature, and portability issues of machine code; albeit, to a 
lesser extent.

## Assembly/Machine Code View of a Processor.

![The Layout of a typical multicore processor.](../Figures/Chapter3/cpu.png)

Since we do not have to worry about the processor at the mircoarchitecture level, 
we can view the processor the way typical machine or assembly code would.

The processor in essence consists of two components. The first is the _central 
processor unit_ \(CPU\), and is the main body from which instructions will be 
executed. It consists of a _program counter_ \(PC\) which stores the address of 
the next instruction, and is viewed by assembly as the `rip` \(`x86_64`\) or 
`eip` \(`x86_32`\), and is referred to as the _instruction pointer_. The CPU 
also contains a _register file_ which contains heavily used program data, and 
contains _condition codes_, which store the status information about arithmetic 
and logical operations, and is also used for conditional branching \(`if`, `else`
statements\). The CPU also contains the _arithmetic logic unit_ \(ALU\) which is 
in charge of handling arithmetic and logical operations.



The other component of a processor is the _memory_. Here, bytes are stored in 
_addresses_ as an addressable array. This array stores code and user data, a 
_heap_ for allocating memory, and a _stack_ to support procedures and variables.
Typically, the CPU sends address and data to memory, while it fetches data and 
instructions from memory.

## Turning `C` into Object Code and Compiling into Assembly.

Typically, a programmer wants to turn code written in a high level language, such 
as `C` into low level machine instructions. For programming languages like 
`C/C++`, `Java`. This is done through the use of a _compiler_. A programmer can 
put code into _source_ files like `p1.c` and `p2.c` and compile them with the 
`gcc` compiler though the command:

```bash
~/ccom4086/ > gcc -o p p1.c p2.c
```

Here, the `-o` flag just specifies the output file, the default output is `a.out`. 
The compiler then takes `p1.c` and `p2.c` as input files and outputs a _binary_ 
file `p` which can be executed by the machine. How the compiler achieves this is 
by:

1. Converting the source files into assembly.
2. Creating _object_ files `p1.o` and `p2.o`.
3. Linking the object files through the linker into the binary file `p`.

If we wanted to implement basic optimization, and even compile it for debugging, 
we can run `gcc` with the following flags `-Og` \(optimization\) and `-g` 
\(debugging\):

```bash
~/ccom4086/ > gcc -Og -g -o p p1.c p2.c
```

![](../Figures/Chapter3/assemblyAndLinkage.png)

```c
// sum.c
long plus(long x, long y);

void sumstore(long x, long y, long *dest){

    long t = plus(x,y);
    *dest = t;

    return;
}
```

We can also view the assembly of some code by compiling with the `gcc` flag `-S`, 
which outputs a `.s` file.

```c
// Portion of sum.s compiled with gcc -Og -S sum.c
sumstore:
.LFB0:
    .cfi_startproc
    pushq    %rbx
    .cfi_def_cfa_offset 16
    .cfi_offset 3, -16
    movq    %rdx, %rbx
    call    plus@PLT
    movq    %rax, (%rbx)
    popq    %rbx
    .cfi_def_cfa_offset 8
    ret
    .cfi_endproc
.LFE0:
    .size    sumstore, .-sumstore
    .ident    "GCC: (GNU) 11.1.0"
    .section    .note.GNU-stack,"",@progbits
```

Due to different versions of the `gcc` compiler running on different machines, 
the assembly output of the source code varies. So it is possible to have multiple
assembly translations of the same source code. Different compiler settings will 
also affect the assembly output of a program. For example, compare the following 
assembly compiled without the `-Og` flag to the one above that was.

```c
// Portion of sum.s compiled with gcc -S sum.c
sumstore:
.LFB0:
    .cfi_startproc
    pushq    %rbp
    .cfi_def_cfa_offset 16
    .cfi_offset 6, -16
    movq    %rsp, %rbp
    .cfi_def_cfa_register 6
    subq    $48, %rsp
    movq    %rdi, -24(%rbp)
    movq    %rsi, -32(%rbp)
    movq    %rdx, -40(%rbp)
    movq    -32(%rbp), %rdx
    movq    -24(%rbp), %rax
    movq    %rdx, %rsi
    movq    %rax, %rdi
    call    plus@PLT
    movq    %rax, -8(%rbp)
    movq    -40(%rbp), %rax
    movq    -8(%rbp), %rdx
    movq    %rdx, (%rax)
    nop
    leave
    .cfi_def_cfa 7, 8
    ret
    .cfi_endproc
```

Actually, additional code for exception handling is injected if not using the flag 
`-fno-asynchronous-unwind-tables`. We usually want to optimize the code, so `-Og` 
is useful, however the more we optimize the code, the further away the assembly 
language is from the original source code. Hence it is good practice to apply a 
level of optimization that maintains some semblance of the original `C` code, in 
order to maintain readability.

## Assembly Characteristics.

### Data Types.

We list how assembly language treats data types.

* `int`:
  * Are of `1`, `2`, `4`, or `8` bytes.
  * Data values.
  * Addresses \(untyped pointers\).
* Floating point:
  * of `4`, `8`, or `10` bytes.
* Code:
  * Byte sequences encoding a series of instructions.
* No Aggregate types such as arrays or structures.
  * Everything is contiguously allocated in memory.

The `C` language, albeit being high level, was also designed with the purpose of 
being as low level as possible, and as close to assembly as possible. Because of 
this, `C` has the added benefit of having some of its data types coincide with 
those used by assembly. `C++`, being built on top of `C` also benefits from this, 
however it is noticeably higher level than `C`.

One can perform arithmetic on registers or memory data in assembly language. 
Typically, data is transferred between memory and a register. Data is loaded 
from memory into a register, and register data can be stored into memory. Assembly 
also handles _transfer control_ where it executes unconditional jumps to and from
procedures, as well as perform conditional branching.

When compiled, the source is translated into assembly, and then loaded into an 
_assembler_, which translates the `.s` into a `.o` object files, takes a binary 
encoding of each instruction, and makes an nearly complete image of executable 
code which is missing the linkage of codes in different files. The _linker_ 
resolves the issue of missing code by resolving references between files and 
combining the code with _static_ runtime libraries. Some of the code can be 
_dynamically_ linked, which means that linking occurs during program execution. 
The following is an example of what is typically stored in a `.o` file. When one 
uses procedures like `printf()` in `C` code, these are located in external 
libraries \(in this case, `stdio.h`\) and are linked to the program at 
compilations. If they are not linked, the program would no work.

```bash
~/ccom4086/ > gcc -Og -c sum.c
~/ccom4086/ > objdump -d sum.o
sum.o:     file format elf64-x86-64


Disassembly of section .text:

0000000000000000 <sumstore>:
   0:    53                       push   %rbx
   1:    48 89 d3                 mov    %rdx,%rbx
   4:    e8 00 00 00 00           call   9 <sumstore+0x9>
   9:    48 89 03                 mov    %rax,(%rbx)
   c:    5b                       pop    %rbx
   d:    c3                       ret
```

Using the command `objdump` is useful for examining object code. With it one can 
analyze but patterns of series of instructions, and produces an approximate 
rendition of assembly code. It can also be run on `a.out` files \(that is 
complete binaries\) as well as `.o` object files. Typically an object dump of a 
binary file has the following format: The following is a portion of 
an object dump performed on the `cat` command of `unix` \(`/usr/bin/cat`\):

```bash
~/ccom4086/ > objdump -d /usr/bin/cat | head

/usr/bin/cat:     file format elf64-x86-64


Disassembly of section .init:

0000000000002000 <.init>:
    2000:    f3 0f 1e fa              endbr64
    2004:    48 83 ec 08              sub    $0x8,%rsp
    2008:    48 8b 05 19 8f 00 00     mov    0x8f19(%rip),%rax
```
```
    addr:   machine code isntr        assembly code instr.
```

The `addr` portion is where the address of the machine code. The machine code
instructions then come after; here the first byte of the machine code piece is
stored in the address. After comes the assembly counter part of the machine
code.

Any piece of software on a computer can be interpreted as executable code, and
hence they can be dissassembled via an object dump. The dissassemble examines
the bytes and reconstructs the assembly source. It is worth noting that while
one may able to disassemble every peice of software, legal agreements and
proprietary licences prohibit it. For example, disassembling a piece of a
Windows `.exe` binary for reverse engineering is forbidden under the Microsoft 
End User License Agreement.
